---
layout: post
title: Cracking the Coding Interview -- Behavorial Questions
tags:
  - CTCI
description: >
  This is my notes on the Data Structure chapters of Cracking the Coding Interview.
hero: https://source.unsplash.com/collection/145103/
overlay: green
published: true
---

I bought this [book][book_url] a little less than a month ago but didn't really had time to read it untill now. I really like this book. It is organized in a very efficient way, touching on all aspects of data structure, concepts and algorithms and advanced topics. It also contains a lot of problems which are really fundamental and beginner-friendly along with detailed solutions to these problems. To my surprise, there is also a section on behavorial questions as well! Since I have a video interview coming up, I am focusing on getting through this part of the book today. I am organizing often-asked questions in this posts, together with my answers into this blog post.

<!–-break-–>

From my past interview experience (which has not been very successful), I often overlook behavorial questions, but end up messing them up because I have to think for too long and can't organize my thoughts into a structred way. But hopefully not this time!

To begin with, how do I introduce myself?
1. Education: ECE @ CMU, love my major and my school
2. Academics: Research in HCI in game design, used Unity to prototype games; Coursework concentrate in software and programming side of Computer Engineering; by far, languages I know best are C and python, proficient in a couple of others
3. Spare time: Leadership in ECEOutreach, teach high shool student basics of circuit buiding and programming -- lab content writer and web master; iOS development

Next, I gotta prepare the classic what is your greatest XXX? (e.g. challenge, failure...)

So... a rough draft for my answers:

Challenges: Seeking help when I am stuck.
Failures(Weakness) : I failed an TA interview recently because I didn't correctly do a problem. I produced a half correct answer but didn't consider all the edge cases.
Enjoyed: Unity project. I worked in a group 
Leadership: hackCMU experience, led a group of amateur programmers.

[book_url]:    https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0984782850/ref=oh_aui_detailpage_o02_s00?ie=UTF8&psc=1