---
layout: post
title: AHH OOP! #1 
tags:
  - Java
description: >
  My notes on Principles of Object Oriented Programming and Software Construction.
hero: https://source.unsplash.com/collection/145103/
overlay: green
published: true
---

<!–-break-–>


School has started for a month. This semester I am loading up my schedule with three very technical and challenging 12-unit classes, which are keeping my academic life extremely busy. That is why I almost had no time writing. However, it occurred to me last week that I could write some blog posts about my course material! On one hand, I would have new content for my blog; on the other hand, I would effectively review the challenging and important concepts learned in class.

So, this is gonna be a series, named AHH OOP, eponymous to a MAMAMOO song I am loving recently. "OOP" here stands for Object Oriented Programming, which is the subject of 17-214 at CMU. Throughout the series, I will write about the material I learned in this class chronologically. However, I will try to arrange the concepts in a blog post in the most reasonable manner. In this class, I am learning about all the good practices in design and development of large-scale projects - reusability, scalability, etc.

## Access control

To begin with, the concept of access control in Java is something relatively new to me. I took some time researching what public/private/protected really mean, and was able to find this helpful little table that beautifully summarizes the gist:

| Name        | Class     | Package      | Subclass     | World     |    
|-------------|-----------|--------------|--------------|-----------|
| public      |         Y |            Y |            Y |         Y |
| protected   |         Y |            Y |            Y |         N |
| no modifier |         Y |            Y |            N |         N |
| private     |         Y |            N |            N |         N |

First and foremost, a public class is accessible everywhere. A protected class(not so commonly used) is not accessible to the world. Classes with no modifiers are by default only visible to class and package. Lastly, a private class isn't accessible anywhere else except in this class.

[access_control_source]

## Static - field/method/class

For a very long time, the meaning of the static keyword has been very obscure to me. It turns out that in Java, there are static fields and static methods. (There are also things called a static block and static nested classes, since this is not covered in class, I will not discuss it here.)

**Static variable** in Java is variable which belongs to the class and initialized only once at the start of the execution. It is shared among all instances of the class. A static method can access only static data. It can not access non-static data (instance variables). A static method can call only other static methods and can not call a non-static method from it.
A static method can be accessed directly by the class name and doesn’t need any object. A static method cannot refer to "this" or "super" keywords in anyway.

**Static method** in Java is a method which belongs to the class and not to the object. A static method can access only static data.

[static_source]

## Final - field/method/class

**Final variables** are values that cannot be modified. **Final classes** cannot be inherited or extended. **Final methods** cannot be overriden.

[final_source]

## Encapsulation
There are a lot of issues (such as thread-safety issues, scalability, etc.) with leaving instance fields of public classes public. This is when encapsulation comes in to avoid such issues.
~~~java
class Point {
	private double x;
	private double y;
	// Constructor
	public Point(double x, double y) {
		this.x = x;
		this.y = y;
	}
	// Accesor method (getter)
	public double getX() { return x; }
	public double getY() { return y; }
	// Mutators (setters)
	public void setX(double x) { this.x = x; }
	public void setY(double y) { this.y = y; }
}
~~~
<!–-break-–>
Encapsulation can be taken a step further by minimizing mutability. And that leads me to the next concept:

## Information Hiding
There are several rules that come in handy when you want to design a class that adheres to the information hiding principles:

1. Don't provide methods that modify the object's state (known as mutators)
2. Ensure that the class can't be extended.
3. Make all fields final
4. Make all fields private
5. Ensure exclusive access to any mutable components

For example:

~~~java
class final class Complex { // final class!
	// final fields
	private final double re;
	private final double im;
	// Constructor
	public Complex(double re, double im) {
		this.re = re;
		this.im = im;
	}
	// Accesor method (getter)
	public double realPart() { return re; }
	public double imaginaryPart() { return im; }

	public Complex plus(Complex c) {
		return new Complex(re + c.re, im + c.im);
	}
	public Complex minus(Complex c) {
		return new Complex(re - c.re, im - c.im);
	}
	public Complex times(Complex c) {
		return new Complex(re * c.re - im * c.im,
						   re * c.im + im * c.re);
	}
	public Complex divideBy(Complex c) {
		double tmp = c.re * c.re + c.im * c.im;
		return new Complex((re * c.re + im * c.im)/tmp, 
						   (im * c.re - re * c.im).tmp);
	}
	@Override public boolean equals(Object o) {
		if (o == this)
			return true;
		if (!(o instanceof Complex))
			return false;
		Complex c = (Complex) o;
		return Double.compare(c.re, re) == 0 &&
			   Double.compare(c.im, im) == 0;
	}
	@Override public int hashCode() {
		return 31 * Double.hashCode(re) + Double.hashCode(im);
	}
	@Override public String toString() {
		return "(" + re + " + " + im + "i)";
	}
}
~~~
<!–-break-–>
Immutable objects are great building blocks for other objects as they are thread-safe, requires no synchronization and can be shared freely.

##Inheritance and Delegation

**Delegation** is simply when one object relies on another object for some subset of its functionality. In the following example, the LoggingList is composed of a List, and delegates (the non-logging) functionality to that List

~~~java
public class LoggingList<E> implements List<E> {
	private final List<E> list;
	public LoggingList<E>(List<E> list) { this.list = list; }
	public boolean add(E e) {
    	System.out.println("Adding " + e);
    	return list.add(e);
	}
	public E remove(int index) {
    	System.out.println("Removing at " + index);
    	return list.remove(index);
    }
}
~~~
<!–-break-–>
Some basic terminology:

**Inheritance** is is the process by which one class takes the property of another other class. i.e. the new classes, known as derived or child class, take over the attributes and behavior of the pre-existing classes, which are referred to as base classes or super or parent class.

* **Super Class**: The class whose features are inherited is known as super class(or a base class or a parent class).
* **Sub Class**: The class that inherits the other class is known as sub class(or a derived class, extended class, or child class). The subclass can add its own fields and methods in addition to the superclass fields and methods.

* **Reusability**: Inheritance supports the concept of “reusability”, i.e. when we want to create a new class and there is already a class that includes some of the code that we want, we can derive our new class from the existing class. By doing this, we are reusing the fields and methods of the existing class.

[inheritance_source] 

~~~java
public interface Account {
    public long getBalance();
    public void  deposit(long amount);
    public boolean withdraw(long amount);
    public boolean transfer(long amount, Account target);
    public void monthlyAdjustment();
}
public interface CheckingAccount extends Account {
	public long getFee();
}
public interface SavingsAccount extends Account {
	public double getInterestRate();
}
public interface InterestCheckingAccount
					extends CheckingAccount, SavingsAccount {
}
~~~
<!–-break-–>
There are advantages/disadvantages to both inheritance and deligation:

1. Inheritance can improve modeling flexibility
	* protected hooks / helper methods
	* Test with subclasses
2. But inheritance violates information hiding while delegation supports it:
		This is because classes are allowed to override methods from its superclass. Doing so safely requires access to how the superclass is implemented. Therefore, it is required to document requirements for overriding any method.


**Summary:**
- Access control
- Static - field/method/class
- Final - field/method/class
- Encapsulation
- Inheritance & delegation
    - Methods common to all objects
    - Information hiding
    - Strengths and weaknesses

[final_source]: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/final-keyword-java/

[static_source]: https://www.guru99.com/java-static-variable-methods.html

[access_control_source]: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/215497/what-is-the-difference-between-public-protected-package-private-and-private-in

[inheritance_source]: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/delegation-vs-inheritance-java/